5.  Implementation and Case Study
This section presents Cordis, which realizes the formal models of Section  3 as a practical 
programming abstraction. Cordis is a meta-framework of spatiotemporal composability: unlike 
application frameworks that target a specific domain (e.g., web routing, ORM, UI rendering), it 
prescribes no concrete scenario; its sole responsibility is to supply universal dynamic compo -
sition semantics. The implementation is layered into three tiers: (1) the core library (Section 5.1) 
implements the effect and coeffect systems directly; (2) the component loader  ( Section  5.2) 
extends the core with configuration reconciliation and hot module replacement; and (3) application frameworks such as Koishi (Section 5.3) build domain-specific functionality on top of 
the former two tiers.
5.1.  Core Library
Table  2 summarizes the correspondence between theoretical constructs and their runtime 
counterparts. In particular, we use the runtime names introduced below throughout this 
section, reserving the theoretical symbols for the formal correspondence. We also write @@name 
for a framework-internal symbol key, so the brackets in ctx[@@store] denote symbol-keyed 
access to an opaque slot on the context, rather than indexing into a string-keyed map.
Theory (Section 3, Section 4) Implementation
Γ∞ ctx, the first-class context
𝛾 ∈ Γ the context tree together with everything the running system 
has touched
𝔈Γ, 𝔈iter
Γ Effect callback returning / yielding inverses
effectΓ(𝑒) ctx.effect(callback)
Σ, Σiso, Σinter ctx[@@store], ctx[@@isolate], ctx[@@intercept]
get(𝑘), set(𝑘, 𝑣) ctx.get(key), ctx.set(key, value)
isolate(𝑘, 𝑟) ctx.isolate(key, realm)
intercept(𝑘, 𝜈) ctx.intercept(key, metadata)
⟨𝑑, 𝑝, 𝑒, 𝜋, 𝜎, 𝜏, 𝜃⟩ fiber, the instantiation of a component in ℭΓ
dom(𝐹𝛾) enumerated through ctx.registry
𝑛 : 𝔑 fiber.uid
𝑑 : 𝔇Γ fiber.inject
𝑝 : 𝔓Γ the component’s provide
𝑒 : 𝔈∗
Γ fiber.apply
𝜋 : 𝔑 fiber.parent.fiber.uid, the fiber owning the context it was 
instantiated on
derived realization (Definition 27) fiber.ctx, the child context the fiber runs in
𝜃 (Definition 44) fiber.state, the lifecycle state, whose LOADING is 𝖱𝖾𝗅𝗈𝖺𝖽𝗂𝗇𝗀 and 
whose FAILED is 𝖨𝗇𝖺𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗏𝖾(𝜉)
recover, accumulator 𝑔 fiber.dispose, the accumulator
𝜔 (Definition 44) fiber.committed, the committed view
provider𝑘(𝛾) an Impl whose provider fiber is ACTIVE
target(𝛾, 𝑛) fiber.target, recomputed by refresh (Algorithm 5), where 
⊥ is INACTIVE
𝖥𝗎𝗍𝗎𝗋𝖾, inertia (Section 4.3.3) fiber.inertia, the handle of the transition in flight
O-Insert, O-Retire (Definition 47) ctx.use and the inverse of its callback (Algorithm 4)
O-Remove the fiber dropped from its runtime, with uid cleared
L-Begin, L-Iter, L-Finish execute’s iteration loop (Algorithm 1)
L-Divert the guard failing at an iteration boundary ( Algorithm 1), or 
reload chaining into unload
L-Leave refresh marking the fiber UNLOADING (Line 10)
L-Unload unload and its inertial chaining (Algorithm 5)
guard on L-Unload unload awaiting the notified dependents (Line 25)
L-Raise the error recorded on the fiber, with its target set to ⊥
Table 2 | Theory-to-implementation correspondence
The remainder of this section builds the core library from the bottom up. Section  5.1.1 
realizes revertible effects, the sole primitive through which a context is mutated; Section 5.1.2 
realizes reactive coeffects over it; Section 5.1.3 composes both into the component lifecycle; and 
Section 5.1.4 exposes the context-level operations built on them.
5.1.1.  Effect Tracking
This section realizes revertible effects ( Section 3.1). Every context mutation in Cordis flows 
through a single primitive, ctx.effect: coeffect provision, component instantiation, and every 
other context-mutating operation reduces to a ctx.effect call, so any operation performed 
through the context is automatically tracked and recovered upon component unloading. Operationally, ctx.effect is the realization of effectiter
Γ  (Definition 52): it takes a callback of type 𝔈iter
Γ  
and lifts it to 𝔈iter
𝜕Γ , yielding a dispose closure that, when invoked, recovers the effect. Cordis 
accepts both 𝔈Γ and 𝔈iter
Γ  through this one operation (ad-hoc polymorphism); we take the 
iterator form as representative, since a plain effect function is the degenerate iterator that yields 
a single inverse. What the operation does not check is the witness that 𝔈∗
Γ carries: the callback 
supplies an inverse, and that the inverse recovers the effect it accompanies is an obligation on 
the component author rather than a property the runtime verifies. Theorem 61 is where the 
calculus appeals to it, and Section 6.1 is where the obligation is delimited.
Algorithm 1 shows the construction of ctx.effect. We write 𝑓 ∘ 𝑔 for the disposer that runs 
𝑓 after 𝑔, and id for the no-op; prepending each new inverse therefore yields LIFO recovery.
Algorithm 1 Effect tracking
1 async function execute(callback, guard)
2 iter ← callback()
3 inverse ← id
4 while guard()
5 (value, done) ← await iter.next()
6 if value then inverse ← value ∘ inverse
7 if done then break
8 return inverse
9 function effect(ctx, callback)
10 armed ← true
11 task ← execute(callback, () ↦ armed)
12 async function dispose()
13 if not armed then return
14 armed ← false
15 recover ← await task
16 recover()
17 ctx.dispose ← dispose ∘ ctx.dispose
18 return dispose
The engine execute drives the callback as an effect iterator ( 𝔈iter
Γ , Definition 51) and folds 
the inverse yielded at each step into a single composite. Before each step it consults a callersupplied guard; once the guard trips, iteration stops and only the inverses accumulated so far 
remain. This is the step-boundary interruption of Section 4.3.2: the 𝖬𝖺𝗒𝖻𝖾(𝔈iter) continuation 
is realized by the iterator’s done flag together with guard.
ctx.effect is a thin wrapper over execute that adds two things. First, self-disposal: the 
guard reports the armed flag, and the returned dispose flips armed to false, which simultaneously 
halts any in-flight iteration and makes recovery fire at most once. Firing twice would apply 
an inverse at a state no application of the effect produced, where nothing holds it to reverting 
anything. Second, parent composition: dispose is prepended to the enclosing context’s accu -
mulated inverse ctx.dispose, so a child effect’s inverse is itself an effect on the parent, which 
is the recursive structure of 𝜕2Γ. The component level (Section 5.1.3) reuses the same execute 
with a guard that tests the stability of fiber.target instead of armed.
5.1.2.  Coeffect Operations
This section realizes reactive coeffects (Section 3.2). All coeffect operations act on three symbolkeyed slots that each context carries:
• @@store: the value store 𝜎 : (𝑟 : 𝑅) ⇀ 𝒱︀𝑟 from realm symbols to typed values;
• @@isolate: the realm table 𝜌 : Map(𝐾, 𝑅) from coeffect keys to realm symbols;
• @@intercept: the interception table 𝜄 : (𝑘 : 𝐾) → ℳ︀𝑘 assigning each key its metadata.
The first two compose into the two-layer resolution 𝑘 → 𝜌(𝑘) → 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘)): ctx.get(key) 
(Algorithm 2) reads the realm symbol 𝜌(𝑘) from @@isolate, then the bound value 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘)) from 
@@store. The 𝜌 indirection lets isolation redirect a key to an independent binding, whereas 
@@intercept is consulted only when a binding is accessed, adjusting how it is used rather 
than what it resolves to. We realize these operations in two parts: (1) provision and notification, 
which install or retract bindings and propagate the change to dependents; and (2) isolation and 
interception, which reshape how a key resolves.
Provision and notification. Since set(𝑘, 𝑣) has type 𝔈Σ (Section 3.1), coeffect provision is 
a ctx.effect call and inherits its automatic tracking and recovery. Algorithm 2 implements 
ctx.set(key, value), the concrete set(𝑘, 𝑣): the callback binds a value into the store under the 
realm symbol 𝜌(𝑘), and the returned dispose function removes it. Both installation and removal 
invoke notify to propagate the change to dependent components.
Algorithm 2 Coeffect operations
1 function get(ctx, key)
2 realm ← ctx[@@isolate][key] ▷ 𝜌(𝑘)
3 return ctx[@@store][realm] ▷ 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘))
4 function set(ctx, key, value)
5 function callback()
6 realm ← ctx[@@isolate][key] ▷ 𝜌(𝑘)
7 ctx[@@store][realm] ← value ▷ 𝜎[𝜌(𝑘) ↦ 𝑣]
8 notify(ctx, [key])
9 return function()
10 delete ctx[@@store][realm] ▷ 𝜎 ∖ 𝜌(𝑘)
11 notify(ctx, [key])
12 return ctx.effect(callback)
Algorithm 3 propagates each binding change to dependents by testing, for each live fiber, 
whether a changed key appears in its fiber.inject and resolves to the same realm; if so, it calls 
refresh (Section 5.1.3) to re-evaluate that fiber against the new state, and it returns the fibers it 
re-evaluated so that a caller can wait for them. This is the reactive classification of Definition 26: 
a change that flips satisfaction activates or deactivates the fiber, and refresh’s idempotence 
renders a neutral change harmless. The interaction of this re-evaluation with diverse control 
flows is developed in Section 5.1.3.
Algorithm 3 Reactive notification
1 function notify(ctx, keys)
2 affected ← ⌀
3 for fiber in all_fibers do
4 for key in keys do
5 if key ∈ fiber.inject and fiber.ctx[@@isolate][key] = ctx[@@isolate][key] then
6 refresh(fiber)
7 affected ← affected ∪ {fiber}
8 break
9 return affected
A binding counts as available to a dependent only while the fiber that installed it is ACTIVE, 
so refresh resolves each declared key against an active provider rather than against the store 
alone. This is the provided by  relation of Definition  46, and it is what makes a withdrawal 
visible to dependents one step before it happens: a provider that has entered UNLOADING has 
stopped providing, so its dependents recompute an unsatisfied target view and begin their 
own teardown while its bindings are all still in place.
Isolation and interception.  The two operations do structurally the same thing: each 
derives a child context that adjusts one inherited table for key, leaving the parent untouched, 
so recovery is implicit: discarding the child context suffices, with no explicit inverse to run. 
ctx.isolate(key, realm) overrides the realm mapping 𝜌 with realm, or a freshly generated 
symbol by default (realizing isolate, Definition  29), so two contexts that assign different 
symbols to the same key resolve to independent bindings. ctx.intercept(key, metadata)  
merges metadata into the interception table 𝜄 (realizing intercept, Definition 31): following that 
definition, the new metadata is combined with whatever the context already carries for key and 
takes priority over it.
5.1.3.  Component Lifecycle
A component is instantiated as a fiber by ctx.use. This section gives the fiber (introduced in 
Section 5.1) operational meaning as the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3. Two fields drive 
the algorithm below: fiber.parent, the parent context of fiber.ctx that forms the component 
hierarchy (the recursive structure of Γ∞, Section 3.3.1), and fiber.inertia, a handle to the inflight asynchronous transition (or null if idle).
Algorithm  4 shows component instantiation. A component pairs a coeffect specification 
component.inject ( 𝑑) with an effect function component.apply; instantiation binds the 
component’s config into fiber.apply (Line 9), the config-applied effect function ( 𝑒) that the 
lifecycle then runs. The callback function (Line 2) is the effect tracked in the parent fiber: when 
executed, it initiates the child’s lifecycle by calling refresh ( Algorithm  5); when recovered, 
it forces the child’s target to ⊥ and triggers unload. This is the registration primitive of 
Definition 47, with callback as its O-Insert and the closure callback returns as its O-Retire: an 
instantiation is an ordinary tracked effect of the parent, so unloading a parent cascades to its 
children.
Algorithm 4 Component instantiation
1 function use(ctx, component, config)
2 function callback()
3 refresh(fiber)
4 return function()
5 fiber.target ← ⊥
6 unload(fiber)
7 fiber ← Fiber(parent: ctx, inject: component.inject)
8 fiber.ctx ← ctx[fiber ↦ fiber]
9 fiber.apply ← () ↦ component.apply(fiber.ctx, config)
10 ctx.effect(callback)
11 return fiber
Algorithm 5 realizes the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3, in which reload and unload 
are inertial: once entered, a transition runs to completion before the system responds to a targetstate change. It uses two auxiliary lookups over the coeffect store: resolve(inject) returns the 
bindings the declared keys currently resolve to, and provided(fiber) returns the keys whose 
binding this fiber installed. The refresh function recomputes fiber.target from the coeffect 
store and, if the fiber is not already in a transition, initiates either a reload or unload task2. The 
reload function records the current target and executes the component’s effect function apply. 
Upon completion, it checks whether the target still matches: if so, the fiber enters ACTIVE; if not 
(regardless of whether the new target is ⊥ or a different set of providers), it chains into unload. 
Symmetrically, unload recovers all tracked effects in LIFO order and then either enters INACTIVE 
or chains into reload. This mutual recursion implements the inertial property: once a transition 
begins, it completes before any new transition can start.
Algorithm 5 Component lifecycle
1 function refresh(fiber)
2 target ← target(𝛾, 𝑛)
3 if target = fiber.target then return
4 fiber.target ← target
5 if fiber.inertia then return
6 if target ≠ ⊥ then
7 fiber.state ← LOADING
8 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
9 else
10 fiber.state ← UNLOADING ▷ out of service before any inverse is scheduled
11 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
12 async function reload(fiber)
13 target0 ← fiber.target
14 fiber.committed ← resolve(fiber.inject) ▷ commit the view
15 recover ← await execute(fiber.apply, () ↦ fiber.target = target0)
16 fiber.dispose ← recover ∘ fiber.dispose
17 if fiber.target = target0 then
18 fiber.state ← ACTIVE
2create_task schedules an async function to run concurrently and returns a handle to it (stored in fiber.inertia). 
We write it explicitly for language independence: with eager scheduling (e.g., TypeScript promises), the call 
is implicit and the returned promise is the handle, whereas with lazy scheduling (e.g., Python coroutines, Rust 
futures) the host must spawn the task for it to progress.
19 notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber))
20 fiber.inertia ← null
21 else
22 fiber.state ← UNLOADING
23 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
24 async function unload(fiber)
25 await all(notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber)).map(f ↦ f.await())) ▷ drain dependents
26 await fiber.dispose()
27 fiber.dispose ← id
28 fiber.committed ← ⊥
29 if fiber.target = ⊥ then
30 fiber.state ← INACTIVE
31 fiber.inertia ← null
32 else
33 fiber.state ← LOADING
34 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
fiber.target is computed by resolving each declared key against the current coeffect store 
and tupling the uid of the fiber that provides it, so it is a digest of target(𝛾, 𝑛) (Definition 46). 
Identifying a binding by its provider rather than by its value is what makes a single comparison 
against the recorded target sufficient: a uid is drawn fresh and never reused, so a provider that 
is replaced cannot be mistaken for the one it replaced, even when the two provide equal values. 
Since notify (Section 5.1.2) recomputes the target on every coeffect change, a fiber reloads 
precisely when one of its declared keys comes to be provided by a different fiber. A provider 
that overwrites its own binding in place is therefore not observed; a component that wants its 
replacement to propagate withdraws the binding and installs it afresh.
The algorithm operates at two complementary levels. At the transition level, reload and 
unload check the target at completion, enabling inertial chaining across transitions. At the 
iteration level within each transition, the effect execution (Algorithm 1) checks the target at each 
iteration boundary, enabling partial rollback within a single transition. These two mechanisms 
correspond to the inter-transition chaining of Section 4.3.3 and the intra-transition staleness 
check that Theorem 64 rests on.
Three lines carry the coeffect ordering of Theorem 63, and where each of them sits is what 
makes the ordering hold. reload commits the resolved view at Line 14 and unload discards it 
only after every inverse has run, so a fiber reads the same bindings for as long as it is loaded, its 
own teardown included. refresh marks the fiber UNLOADING at Line 10 before the transition task 
is created, which is the L-Leave step: the fiber stops providing, and the dependents recompute 
against that before any of its inverses is scheduled. unload then waits at Line 25 for each notified 
dependent to reach INACTIVE, which is the guard on L-Unload; notify admits a dependent only 
when its declared key resolves to the same realm symbol as the provider’s, which is the runtime 
form of the guard’s demand that the dependent see the key from this fiber rather than merely 
declare it. The wait sits ahead of the whole recovery rather than inside one of the inverses being 
waited on, since fiber.dispose initiates a fiber’s effects concurrently and a wait placed within 
one of them would leave the rest unordered. Termination follows Theorem 66: a fiber only ever 
waits on dependents that have already stopped being satisfiable, and a dependent that is itself 
a provider waits the same way for its own, so the provider graph is traversed on demand rather 
than analyzed in advance.
5.1.4.  Context Access
The coeffect operations of Section  5.1.2 form a reflective API: a coeffect is written with 
ctx.set(key, value) and read with ctx.get(key), both keyed by name. Cordis layers a second, 
more native way to extend and consume the context on top of this reflective API: property access. 
A component can access a coeffect as the property ctx[key], as if it were native structure of 
the context, rather than through a method call. In TypeScript, Cordis realizes this with a Proxy 
whose get trap mediates every property access. Algorithm 6 shows how a context resolves such 
an access to a coeffect, atop the primitive get of Section 5.1.2.
Algorithm 6 Proxy-mediated context access
1 function resolve(ctx, key)
2 fiber ← ctx.fiber
3 repeat
4 if key ∈ fiber.committed then return fiber.committed[key]
5 if key ∈ fiber.inject then throw INACTIVE_ACCESS
6 if fiber = root then throw UNDECLARED_ACCESS
7 fiber ← fiber.parent.fiber
Algorithm  6 walks the fiber chain upward from the accessing context: at the first fiber 
whose committed view binds key, the access is authorized and that binding is returned; if the 
walk reaches a fiber that declares key without having committed it, the fiber is not loaded 
and the access fails; and if it reaches the root without any declaration, the access is rejected as 
undeclared. This is where the proxy differs from the bare ctx.get: ctx.get(key) is a lookup 
against the store that returns the bound value or nothing and never fails, whereas the proxy 
resolves against the accessing fiber’s own view and enforces the coeffect specification 𝑑 at the 
point of use. Reading the view rather than the store is also what Theorem 63 rests on, since it 
is what keeps a dependency readable to a component whose teardown was triggered by that 
dependency going away.
This rejection is a runtime check performed at the point of access. Because a component’s 
coeffect specification 𝑑 is declared statically, the same violation is in principle detectable at 
compile time, by resolving each ctx[key] against the declared 𝑑 before execution; Section 6.4 
discusses how a host language’s type-level dependency declarations and compile-time 
metaprogramming can carry out exactly this mediation.
5.2.  Component Loader
The core library equips component developers with imperative primitives for dynamic compo -
sition, such as ctx.effect, ctx.use, and ctx.set. A separate concern arises for application 
orchestrators, who assemble pre-existing components into a running system and adjust the 
composition over its lifetime. The component loader addresses this concern by introducing a declarative configuration layer: the orchestrator specifies the desired composition as a persistent 
data structure, and the loader translates changes to this specification into the corresponding 
imperative fiber operations.
5.2.1.  Declarative Configuration
Section 4 decomposes a running system into fibers, each an instantiation of one component. 
Everything an instantiation needs can be declared, so an orchestrator can describe a whole 
system as a declarative configuration: a persistent record that the loader realizes as fibers and 
keeps in step with them.
Entries. A configuration consists of entries. Each entry specifies a fiber and manages it, and 
the binding runs in both directions: the loader responds to a change in an entry’s fields by 
adjusting the fiber, and a component that revises its own configuration or disables itself has the 
change written back to its entry.
Definition 74. An entry declares a single fiber, recording:
• id — a stable identifier, used as the reconciliation key when its group’s child list changes;
• url — the URL of the component module to instantiate;
• isolate — an isolation annotation applied to the entry’s context;
• intercept — an interception annotation applied to the entry’s context;
• config — the configuration bound into the component to form its effect function apply;
• disabled — whether the entry is administratively turned off.
An entry can serve as a faithful specification because what supports a fiber is exactly what 
an entry records. The support set of Definition 67 reads 𝜏, 𝜋, 𝑑, and 𝑝 and nothing else, and 
an entry gives all four: disabled gives 𝜏, the entry’s parent in the tree gives 𝜋, and url selects 
the component which declares 𝑑 and 𝑝. The fields the support set leaves unread are the fiber’s 
runtime state, which an instantiation does not need either, and Lemma 70 identifies the support 
set with the 𝖠𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗏𝖾 fibers of a quiescent state (Definition 49) as far as each component installs 
every key it declares (Definition 69).
These entries form a configuration tree that is the authoritative record of what the system 
loads. An entry may be a leaf mapping to a single fiber, or its component may in turn load 
further components, making the entry a branch node. Cordis provides components for such 
grouped and nested loading: @cordisjs/group takes a list of child entries as its configuration 
and loads them as a subgroup, and @cordisjs/include loads an external configuration file 
(YAML or JSON) and grafts its entries in as a nested subtree. Both are ordinary components 
resting on the registration primitive of Definition 47 (Algorithm 4), so a nested tree stays within 
the calculus and the results below hold of it.
Reconciliation. When an entry’s record changes, the loader reconciles incrementally rather 
than tearing the fiber down and rebuilding it wholesale. Reconciling this way is sound for 
reasons the metatheory supplies.
• Theorem 73 makes the quiescent state a function of the final configuration alone: what -
ever instantiations and retirements the loader performs on the way, and in whatever 
order, the system quiesces where a load of the final configuration from scratch would 
have left it. Which components end up loaded is read off the declarations only as far as 
each of them installs every key it declares ( Definition 69); a component that declares a 
key and installs it under some configurations alone is one the loader can still reconcile, 
but the set of loaded components then answers to those configurations as well.
• Theorem 66 proves that the system does quiesce, so a reconciliation is complete once its 
instantiations and retirements have been issued.
• Corollary 62 puts a departing fiber’s contribution to the state at nothing, so rebuilding 
one entry withdraws what its fiber installed and leaves the fibers around it as they were.
• Theorem 63 lets the entries be instantiated together, with no load order for the orches -
trator to arrange: a fiber whose declared keys are not yet provided waits at its L-Begin, and 
one whose provider leaves is deactivated ahead of it. A dependency therefore constrains 
when a fiber activates rather than when its module is fetched and evaluated, so the loader 
loads modules concurrently, where bringing up a large configuration spends its time.
On top of the fiber that an entry declares, the loader dispatches on which of the entry’s 
fields changed and applies the least disruptive operation for each.
• id, url — rebuilds the entry, since its identity or its component has changed;
• isolate — reassigns the entry’s realms (Algorithm 7);
• intercept — updated in place, as interception metadata is consulted at read time and 
needs no reload;
• config — handed to the component, which decides how to apply the new payload, 
typically by diffing it against the previous one and reloading only on a material change. 
In particular, an @cordisjs/group entry’s config is its list of child entries, so it applies the 
update as a keyed diff over child ids, creating, removing, or updating each child; since 
updating a surviving child re-enters this same per-field dispatch, group reconciliation 
and entry update recurse together down the tree;
• disabled — unloads the fiber when set and reloads it when cleared.
Managed realms. Isolation in the core derives a child context overriding the realm table 𝜌 
at one key (Section 5.1.2), which suffices while the context tree stands still. An entry may be 
moved between groups at runtime, so the loader manages realms of its own, and the isolate 
field selects between two scoping rules per key. A value of true asks for a local realm, private 
to the entry and tagged by its id, which the entry carries with it wherever it moves; a string 
asks for a global realm shared by every entry naming that string, so moving such an entry 
changes which entries it shares a binding with rather than which realm it belongs to. A realm 
is discarded once no entry names it.
Reassigning an entry’s realms turns on which keys changed realm, whether the entry is 
itself the provider at a changed key, and which dependents to notify. The middle question is 
the hard one, since a realm symbol may be shared by several fibers of which only one is the 
provider. The loader answers it with delimiters: one symbol 𝛿𝑘 per key, under which each context 
stores a tag of its own. A delimiter is written on a context and inherited by its descendants, so 
the entry’s tag and the provider’s agree exactly when the two were derived within one isolate 
scope for 𝑘, which is the case in which the binding at 𝑘 is the entry’s own and has to move 
with it.
Algorithm 7 Isolation realm reassignment
1 function patch_isolation(entry, 𝜌′)
2 𝜌 ← entry.ctx[@@isolate]
3 store ← entry.ctx[@@store]
4 Δ ← {𝑘 | 𝜌(𝑘) ≠ 𝜌′(𝑘)} ▷ keys whose realm changes
5 for 𝑘 in Δ do
6 entry.ctx[𝛿𝑘] ← fresh tag
7 diff[𝑘] ← (𝜌(𝑘), 𝜌′(𝑘), entry.ctx[𝛿𝑘], store[𝜌(𝑘)].fiber.ctx[𝛿𝑘])
8 entry.ctx[@@isolate] ← 𝜌′
9 reload(entry.fiber)
10 for 𝑘 in Δ do
11 (𝑠1, 𝑠2, 𝑑1, 𝑑2) ← diff[𝑘]
12 if 𝑑1 = 𝑑2 and store[𝑠1] and not store[𝑠2] then ▷ the binding is the entry’s own
13 store[𝑠2] ← store[𝑠1]
14 delete store[𝑠1]
15 function affected(fiber, 𝑘)
16 (𝑠1, 𝑠2, 𝑑1, 𝑑2) ← diff[𝑘]
17 return fiber.ctx[@@isolate][𝑘] ∈ {𝑠1, 𝑠2} and (fiber.ctx[𝛿𝑘] = 𝑑1) ≠ (𝑑2 = 𝑑1)
18 notify(entry.ctx, Δ, affected) ▷ in place of the realm test of Algorithm 3
The test turns on one property of delimiters. The tag under 𝛿𝑘 is written on the entry’s 
context and inherited by every context derived from it, and it is drawn afresh at each reassignment, so for a context 𝛾′
𝛾′[𝛿𝑘] = 𝑑1 ⟺ 𝛾′ is derived from the entry's context (65)
Write own(𝛾′) for that condition, of which 𝑑2 = 𝑑1 is the instance at the provider. The 
reassignment moves the contexts satisfying own from 𝑠1 to 𝑠2 and leaves the others where they 
are, and by the loop above it moves the binding to 𝑠2 exactly when the provider satisfies own. 
A dependent sees the binding while its own realm at 𝑘 is the realm the binding sits in. Where 
own agrees on the dependent and the provider, both move or neither does, so the dependent 
sees the binding afterwards exactly when it saw it before. Where own separates them, one side 
moves and the other stays, so the dependent gains or loses the binding. The inequality is that 
separation, and the membership test drops the dependents resolving 𝑘 in neither realm, which 
no part of the move reaches.
5.2.2.  Hot Module Replacement
Hot module replacement (HMR) applies the revertible-effect pattern at the module level: when 
source files change, typically during development, the system replaces the affected modules 
in-place without restarting the process. Because a fiber already bounds all of its component’s 
effects and coeffects, a module that is itself a component can be replaced through fiber opera -
tions alone: disposing the old fiber recovers everything the component installed, and a new 
fiber instantiated from the reloaded module reinstalls it. HMR therefore needs no developerannotated acceptance boundaries, as opposed to Webpack [46] or Vite [47] HMR.
The @cordisjs/hmr component provides the HMR engine, which operates in three phases.
Phase 1: Module classification.  The engine takes two inputs: the stashed set (file URLs 
whose contents have changed since the last reload) and the externals set (modules that cannot 
be hot-replaced and instead trigger a full restart). Writing get_imports(url) for the modules 
that url directly imports, it classifies the changes’ dependency subgraph, marking each module 
accepted or declined:
Algorithm 8 Module classification
1 function classify(stashed, externals)
2 accepted ← stashed
3 declined ← externals
4 pending ← ⌀
5 for url in stashed do
6 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
7 repeat
8 progress ← false
9 for url in pending do
10 if get_imports(url) ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
11 accepted ← accepted ∪ {url}
12 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
13 progress ← true
14 else if get_imports(url) ⊆ declined then
15 declined ← declined ∪ {url}
16 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
17 progress ← true
18 else
19 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
20 until not progress
21 declined ← declined ∪ pending
22 return (accepted, declined)
Seeded with the imports of the stashed files, the fixed point accepts a module once one of 
its imports is accepted and declines one once all of its imports are declined; any module left 
undecided, caught in an import cycle, defaults to declined.
Phase 2: Stale-entry detection.  Using accepted and declined, the engine then filters the 
component entries down to the stale ones, whose dependency tree reaches a changed module. It 
walks each entry’s tree with get_dependencies, which collects the transitive imports of a module 
while respecting declined as a boundary:
Algorithm 9 Stale-entry detection
1 function get_dependencies(root, declined)
2 deps ← ⌀
3 function traverse(url)
4 if url ∈ deps or url ∈ declined then return
5 deps ← deps ∪ {url}
6 for child in get_imports(url) do traverse(child)
7 traverse(root)
8 return deps
9 function detect(entries, accepted, declined)
10 stale_entries ← ⌀
11 for entry in entries do
12 tree ← get_dependencies(entry.url, declined)
13 if tree ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
14 accepted ← accepted ∪ tree
15 stale_entries ← stale_entries ∪ {entry}
16 return stale_entries
An entry is stale exactly when its tree intersects accepted; that tree is then folded into 
accepted, so every stale module along it is invalidated in the next phase.
Phase 3: Transactional reload.  Finally, the engine reloads the stale entries. It invalidates 
the accepted modules’ caches 3, backing up each removed module to enable rollback, then reimports each stale entry’s component module by its url and swaps in a fresh fiber:
Algorithm 10 Transactional module reload
1 function reload(ctx, accepted, stale_entries)
2 backup ← invalidate_caches(accepted)
3 try
4 for entry in stale_entries do
5 entry.fiber.dispose()
6 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(import(entry.url), entry.config)
7 catch error
8 restore_caches(backup)
9 for entry in stale_entries do
10 entry.fiber.dispose()
11 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(backup[entry.url], entry.config)
12 throw error
The transactional guarantee ensures that the system never enters a half-reloaded state: if 
any module fails to import (e.g., due to a syntax error), the caches are restored and every 
stale entry is rebuilt from backup[entry.url], the previous component whose cache was just 
restored, undoing the swaps already made.
5.3.  Case Study: Koishi
Koishi is an open-source chatbot application framework built on Cordis 4. Over four years of 
development, it has accumulated over 4000 community-contributed plugins 5, ranging from 
instant-messaging (IM) adapters and database drivers to administrative consoles and enduser features. Its scale and diversity make it a representative validation of Cordis’s dynamic 
composability in a production setting.
Expressiveness and generality of the meta-framework.  Koishi runs as a server-side bot 
whose every feature is realized as a plugin over the context primitives of Section 5.1; Koishi 
itself contributes only the chatbot-domain vocabulary. The same model reappears in a wholly 
different runtime: Koishi’s web console is a second, independent Cordis application whose 
plugins compose the primitives of the browser and its user interface rather than those of the 
server. The disparate settings above establish two properties of the model of Section 3. (1) It 
is expressive: its primitives suffice to carry a complete production system, the host framework 
supplying only domain vocabulary. (2) It is general: it fixes how effects and coeffects compose 
while leaving their meaning to each application, and so presupposes neither a particular 
domain nor a particular runtime.
Temporal composability without cognitive overhead.  The plugin systems surveyed in 
Section 1.2.1 cannot unload an individual extension’s effects without restarting the extension 
3On Node.js, this means clearing the caches of both the ES module and CommonJS module systems, since a 
module imported through the ES loader can appear in both.
4Koishi currently uses Cordis v3. This paper presents Cordis v4, which refines the effect and coeffect semantics 
and redesigns the loader; the core compositional model is shared across both versions.
5Koishi uses the term plugin for the concept this paper formalizes as component.
host. Koishi routinely performs this operation: an orchestrator disables a plugin from the 
console and its effects are withdrawn in place; during development, the HMR engine re-applies 
edited plugins on save while preserving cache state and live connections elsewhere in the 
system. Cordis makes such removal not merely possible but effortless for the plugin author. 
Because effects performed through the context are tracked and their inverses composed auto -
matically (Section 3.1), even an inexperienced author obtains ordered cleanup for a plugin’s 
context-mediated effects without writing an uninstall path. This achieves the locality of concern 
whose absence Section 1.2.1 identifies: correctness that would otherwise rest on each author’s 
diligence is instead discharged once, by the abstraction.
Spatial composability across an open ecosystem.  In contrast to the plugin systems of 
Section 1.2.1, where inter-plugin dependencies are largely absent, Koishi’s ecosystem exhibits 
a genuine dependency topology: IM adapters provide access to each messaging platform, 
database drivers provide persistent storage, and functional plugins declare these as coeffects 
and access them. Reconfiguring a provider at runtime, such as switching the storage backend or 
reconnecting an adapter, reactivates only the dependents whose resolved dependency changed 
(Section 3.2); a plugin whose dependency is unavailable stays inactive until it appears, without 
erroring. What the case study substantiates is that this composition holds across independently 
authored code: a plugin and its dependencies are typically written by different authors who 
coordinate on nothing beyond the coeffect that connects them, so reactive coeffects keep the 
assembly consistent across an open ecosystem of independent contributors.
Threats to validity. The evidence here is drawn from a single ecosystem in a single host language, so it cannot separate the merits of the paradigm from those of its TypeScript realization 
or of Koishi’s particular domain, and it is observational rather than a controlled comparison 
against an alternative architecture. What the case study establishes is thus an existence-andadoption result rather than a quantitative one; measuring the abstraction’s overhead and its 
effect on developer productivity against a baseline remains future work.