5.2.2.  Hot Module Replacement
Hot module replacement (HMR) applies the revertible-effect pattern at the module level: when 
source files change, typically during development, the system replaces the affected modules 
in-place without restarting the process. Because a fiber already bounds all of its component’s 
effects and coeffects, a module that is itself a component can be replaced through fiber opera -
tions alone: disposing the old fiber recovers everything the component installed, and a new 
fiber instantiated from the reloaded module reinstalls it. HMR therefore needs no developerannotated acceptance boundaries, as opposed to Webpack [46] or Vite [47] HMR.
The @cordisjs/hmr component provides the HMR engine, which operates in three phases.
Phase 1: Module classification.  The engine takes two inputs: the stashed set (file URLs 
whose contents have changed since the last reload) and the externals set (modules that cannot 
be hot-replaced and instead trigger a full restart). Writing get_imports(url) for the modules 
that url directly imports, it classifies the changes’ dependency subgraph, marking each module 
accepted or declined:
Algorithm 8 Module classification
1 function classify(stashed, externals)
2 accepted ← stashed
3 declined ← externals
4 pending ← ⌀
5 for url in stashed do
6 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
7 repeat
8 progress ← false
9 for url in pending do
10 if get_imports(url) ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
11 accepted ← accepted ∪ {url}
12 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
13 progress ← true
14 else if get_imports(url) ⊆ declined then
15 declined ← declined ∪ {url}
16 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
17 progress ← true
18 else
19 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
20 until not progress
21 declined ← declined ∪ pending
22 return (accepted, declined)
Seeded with the imports of the stashed files, the fixed point accepts a module once one of 
its imports is accepted and declines one once all of its imports are declined; any module left 
undecided, caught in an import cycle, defaults to declined.
Phase 2: Stale-entry detection.  Using accepted and declined, the engine then filters the 
component entries down to the stale ones, whose dependency tree reaches a changed module. It 
walks each entry’s tree with get_dependencies, which collects the transitive imports of a module 
while respecting declined as a boundary:
Algorithm 9 Stale-entry detection
1 function get_dependencies(root, declined)
2 deps ← ⌀
3 function traverse(url)
4 if url ∈ deps or url ∈ declined then return
5 deps ← deps ∪ {url}
6 for child in get_imports(url) do traverse(child)
7 traverse(root)
8 return deps
9 function detect(entries, accepted, declined)
10 stale_entries ← ⌀
11 for entry in entries do
12 tree ← get_dependencies(entry.url, declined)
13 if tree ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
14 accepted ← accepted ∪ tree
15 stale_entries ← stale_entries ∪ {entry}
16 return stale_entries
An entry is stale exactly when its tree intersects accepted; that tree is then folded into 
accepted, so every stale module along it is invalidated in the next phase.
Phase 3: Transactional reload.  Finally, the engine reloads the stale entries. It invalidates 
the accepted modules’ caches 3, backing up each removed module to enable rollback, then reimports each stale entry’s component module by its url and swaps in a fresh fiber:
Algorithm 10 Transactional module reload
1 function reload(ctx, accepted, stale_entries)
2 backup ← invalidate_caches(accepted)
3 try
4 for entry in stale_entries do
5 entry.fiber.dispose()
6 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(import(entry.url), entry.config)
7 catch error
8 restore_caches(backup)
9 for entry in stale_entries do
10 entry.fiber.dispose()
11 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(backup[entry.url], entry.config)
12 throw error
The transactional guarantee ensures that the system never enters a half-reloaded state: if 
any module fails to import (e.g., due to a syntax error), the caches are restored and every 
stale entry is rebuilt from backup[entry.url], the previous component whose cache was just 
restored, undoing the swaps already made.