5.1.  Core Library
Table  2 summarizes the correspondence between theoretical constructs and their runtime 
counterparts. In particular, we use the runtime names introduced below throughout this 
section, reserving the theoretical symbols for the formal correspondence. We also write @@name 
for a framework-internal symbol key, so the brackets in ctx[@@store] denote symbol-keyed 
access to an opaque slot on the context, rather than indexing into a string-keyed map.
Theory (Section 3, Section 4) Implementation
Γ∞ ctx, the first-class context
𝛾 ∈ Γ the context tree together with everything the running system 
has touched
𝔈Γ, 𝔈iter
Γ Effect callback returning / yielding inverses
effectΓ(𝑒) ctx.effect(callback)
Σ, Σiso, Σinter ctx[@@store], ctx[@@isolate], ctx[@@intercept]
get(𝑘), set(𝑘, 𝑣) ctx.get(key), ctx.set(key, value)
isolate(𝑘, 𝑟) ctx.isolate(key, realm)
intercept(𝑘, 𝜈) ctx.intercept(key, metadata)
⟨𝑑, 𝑝, 𝑒, 𝜋, 𝜎, 𝜏, 𝜃⟩ fiber, the instantiation of a component in ℭΓ
dom(𝐹𝛾) enumerated through ctx.registry
𝑛 : 𝔑 fiber.uid
𝑑 : 𝔇Γ fiber.inject
𝑝 : 𝔓Γ the component’s provide
𝑒 : 𝔈∗
Γ fiber.apply
𝜋 : 𝔑 fiber.parent.fiber.uid, the fiber owning the context it was 
instantiated on
derived realization (Definition 27) fiber.ctx, the child context the fiber runs in
𝜃 (Definition 44) fiber.state, the lifecycle state, whose LOADING is 𝖱𝖾𝗅𝗈𝖺𝖽𝗂𝗇𝗀 and 
whose FAILED is 𝖨𝗇𝖺𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗏𝖾(𝜉)
recover, accumulator 𝑔 fiber.dispose, the accumulator
𝜔 (Definition 44) fiber.committed, the committed view
provider𝑘(𝛾) an Impl whose provider fiber is ACTIVE
target(𝛾, 𝑛) fiber.target, recomputed by refresh (Algorithm 5), where 
⊥ is INACTIVE
𝖥𝗎𝗍𝗎𝗋𝖾, inertia (Section 4.3.3) fiber.inertia, the handle of the transition in flight
O-Insert, O-Retire (Definition 47) ctx.use and the inverse of its callback (Algorithm 4)
O-Remove the fiber dropped from its runtime, with uid cleared
L-Begin, L-Iter, L-Finish execute’s iteration loop (Algorithm 1)
L-Divert the guard failing at an iteration boundary ( Algorithm 1), or 
reload chaining into unload
L-Leave refresh marking the fiber UNLOADING (Line 10)
L-Unload unload and its inertial chaining (Algorithm 5)
guard on L-Unload unload awaiting the notified dependents (Line 25)
L-Raise the error recorded on the fiber, with its target set to ⊥
Table 2 | Theory-to-implementation correspondence
The remainder of this section builds the core library from the bottom up. Section  5.1.1 
realizes revertible effects, the sole primitive through which a context is mutated; Section 5.1.2 
realizes reactive coeffects over it; Section 5.1.3 composes both into the component lifecycle; and 
Section 5.1.4 exposes the context-level operations built on them.
5.1.1.  Effect Tracking
This section realizes revertible effects ( Section 3.1). Every context mutation in Cordis flows 
through a single primitive, ctx.effect: coeffect provision, component instantiation, and every 
other context-mutating operation reduces to a ctx.effect call, so any operation performed 
through the context is automatically tracked and recovered upon component unloading. Operationally, ctx.effect is the realization of effectiter
Γ  (Definition 52): it takes a callback of type 𝔈iter
Γ  
and lifts it to 𝔈iter
𝜕Γ , yielding a dispose closure that, when invoked, recovers the effect. Cordis 
accepts both 𝔈Γ and 𝔈iter
Γ  through this one operation (ad-hoc polymorphism); we take the 
iterator form as representative, since a plain effect function is the degenerate iterator that yields 
a single inverse. What the operation does not check is the witness that 𝔈∗
Γ carries: the callback 
supplies an inverse, and that the inverse recovers the effect it accompanies is an obligation on 
the component author rather than a property the runtime verifies. Theorem 61 is where the 
calculus appeals to it, and Section 6.1 is where the obligation is delimited.
Algorithm 1 shows the construction of ctx.effect. We write 𝑓 ∘ 𝑔 for the disposer that runs 
𝑓 after 𝑔, and id for the no-op; prepending each new inverse therefore yields LIFO recovery.
Algorithm 1 Effect tracking
1 async function execute(callback, guard)
2 iter ← callback()
3 inverse ← id
4 while guard()
5 (value, done) ← await iter.next()
6 if value then inverse ← value ∘ inverse
7 if done then break
8 return inverse
9 function effect(ctx, callback)
10 armed ← true
11 task ← execute(callback, () ↦ armed)
12 async function dispose()
13 if not armed then return
14 armed ← false
15 recover ← await task
16 recover()
17 ctx.dispose ← dispose ∘ ctx.dispose
18 return dispose
The engine execute drives the callback as an effect iterator ( 𝔈iter
Γ , Definition 51) and folds 
the inverse yielded at each step into a single composite. Before each step it consults a callersupplied guard; once the guard trips, iteration stops and only the inverses accumulated so far 
remain. This is the step-boundary interruption of Section 4.3.2: the 𝖬𝖺𝗒𝖻𝖾(𝔈iter) continuation 
is realized by the iterator’s done flag together with guard.
ctx.effect is a thin wrapper over execute that adds two things. First, self-disposal: the 
guard reports the armed flag, and the returned dispose flips armed to false, which simultaneously 
halts any in-flight iteration and makes recovery fire at most once. Firing twice would apply 
an inverse at a state no application of the effect produced, where nothing holds it to reverting 
anything. Second, parent composition: dispose is prepended to the enclosing context’s accu -
mulated inverse ctx.dispose, so a child effect’s inverse is itself an effect on the parent, which 
is the recursive structure of 𝜕2Γ. The component level (Section 5.1.3) reuses the same execute 
with a guard that tests the stability of fiber.target instead of armed.
5.1.2.  Coeffect Operations
This section realizes reactive coeffects (Section 3.2). All coeffect operations act on three symbolkeyed slots that each context carries:
• @@store: the value store 𝜎 : (𝑟 : 𝑅) ⇀ 𝒱︀𝑟 from realm symbols to typed values;
• @@isolate: the realm table 𝜌 : Map(𝐾, 𝑅) from coeffect keys to realm symbols;
• @@intercept: the interception table 𝜄 : (𝑘 : 𝐾) → ℳ︀𝑘 assigning each key its metadata.
The first two compose into the two-layer resolution 𝑘 → 𝜌(𝑘) → 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘)): ctx.get(key) 
(Algorithm 2) reads the realm symbol 𝜌(𝑘) from @@isolate, then the bound value 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘)) from 
@@store. The 𝜌 indirection lets isolation redirect a key to an independent binding, whereas 
@@intercept is consulted only when a binding is accessed, adjusting how it is used rather 
than what it resolves to. We realize these operations in two parts: (1) provision and notification, 
which install or retract bindings and propagate the change to dependents; and (2) isolation and 
interception, which reshape how a key resolves.
Provision and notification. Since set(𝑘, 𝑣) has type 𝔈Σ (Section 3.1), coeffect provision is 
a ctx.effect call and inherits its automatic tracking and recovery. Algorithm 2 implements 
ctx.set(key, value), the concrete set(𝑘, 𝑣): the callback binds a value into the store under the 
realm symbol 𝜌(𝑘), and the returned dispose function removes it. Both installation and removal 
invoke notify to propagate the change to dependent components.
Algorithm 2 Coeffect operations
1 function get(ctx, key)
2 realm ← ctx[@@isolate][key] ▷ 𝜌(𝑘)
3 return ctx[@@store][realm] ▷ 𝜎(𝜌(𝑘))
4 function set(ctx, key, value)
5 function callback()
6 realm ← ctx[@@isolate][key] ▷ 𝜌(𝑘)
7 ctx[@@store][realm] ← value ▷ 𝜎[𝜌(𝑘) ↦ 𝑣]
8 notify(ctx, [key])
9 return function()
10 delete ctx[@@store][realm] ▷ 𝜎 ∖ 𝜌(𝑘)
11 notify(ctx, [key])
12 return ctx.effect(callback)
Algorithm 3 propagates each binding change to dependents by testing, for each live fiber, 
whether a changed key appears in its fiber.inject and resolves to the same realm; if so, it calls 
refresh (Section 5.1.3) to re-evaluate that fiber against the new state, and it returns the fibers it 
re-evaluated so that a caller can wait for them. This is the reactive classification of Definition 26: 
a change that flips satisfaction activates or deactivates the fiber, and refresh’s idempotence 
renders a neutral change harmless. The interaction of this re-evaluation with diverse control 
flows is developed in Section 5.1.3.
Algorithm 3 Reactive notification
1 function notify(ctx, keys)
2 affected ← ⌀
3 for fiber in all_fibers do
4 for key in keys do
5 if key ∈ fiber.inject and fiber.ctx[@@isolate][key] = ctx[@@isolate][key] then
6 refresh(fiber)
7 affected ← affected ∪ {fiber}
8 break
9 return affected
A binding counts as available to a dependent only while the fiber that installed it is ACTIVE, 
so refresh resolves each declared key against an active provider rather than against the store 
alone. This is the provided by  relation of Definition  46, and it is what makes a withdrawal 
visible to dependents one step before it happens: a provider that has entered UNLOADING has 
stopped providing, so its dependents recompute an unsatisfied target view and begin their 
own teardown while its bindings are all still in place.
Isolation and interception.  The two operations do structurally the same thing: each 
derives a child context that adjusts one inherited table for key, leaving the parent untouched, 
so recovery is implicit: discarding the child context suffices, with no explicit inverse to run. 
ctx.isolate(key, realm) overrides the realm mapping 𝜌 with realm, or a freshly generated 
symbol by default (realizing isolate, Definition  29), so two contexts that assign different 
symbols to the same key resolve to independent bindings. ctx.intercept(key, metadata)  
merges metadata into the interception table 𝜄 (realizing intercept, Definition 31): following that 
definition, the new metadata is combined with whatever the context already carries for key and 
takes priority over it.
5.1.3.  Component Lifecycle
A component is instantiated as a fiber by ctx.use. This section gives the fiber (introduced in 
Section 5.1) operational meaning as the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3. Two fields drive 
the algorithm below: fiber.parent, the parent context of fiber.ctx that forms the component 
hierarchy (the recursive structure of Γ∞, Section 3.3.1), and fiber.inertia, a handle to the inflight asynchronous transition (or null if idle).
Algorithm  4 shows component instantiation. A component pairs a coeffect specification 
component.inject ( 𝑑) with an effect function component.apply; instantiation binds the 
component’s config into fiber.apply (Line 9), the config-applied effect function ( 𝑒) that the 
lifecycle then runs. The callback function (Line 2) is the effect tracked in the parent fiber: when 
executed, it initiates the child’s lifecycle by calling refresh ( Algorithm  5); when recovered, 
it forces the child’s target to ⊥ and triggers unload. This is the registration primitive of 
Definition 47, with callback as its O-Insert and the closure callback returns as its O-Retire: an 
instantiation is an ordinary tracked effect of the parent, so unloading a parent cascades to its 
children.
Algorithm 4 Component instantiation
1 function use(ctx, component, config)
2 function callback()
3 refresh(fiber)
4 return function()
5 fiber.target ← ⊥
6 unload(fiber)
7 fiber ← Fiber(parent: ctx, inject: component.inject)
8 fiber.ctx ← ctx[fiber ↦ fiber]
9 fiber.apply ← () ↦ component.apply(fiber.ctx, config)
10 ctx.effect(callback)
11 return fiber
Algorithm 5 realizes the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3, in which reload and unload 
are inertial: once entered, a transition runs to completion before the system responds to a targetstate change. It uses two auxiliary lookups over the coeffect store: resolve(inject) returns the 
bindings the declared keys currently resolve to, and provided(fiber) returns the keys whose 
binding this fiber installed. The refresh function recomputes fiber.target from the coeffect 
store and, if the fiber is not already in a transition, initiates either a reload or unload task2. The 
reload function records the current target and executes the component’s effect function apply. 
Upon completion, it checks whether the target still matches: if so, the fiber enters ACTIVE; if not 
(regardless of whether the new target is ⊥ or a different set of providers), it chains into unload. 
Symmetrically, unload recovers all tracked effects in LIFO order and then either enters INACTIVE 
or chains into reload. This mutual recursion implements the inertial property: once a transition 
begins, it completes before any new transition can start.
Algorithm 5 Component lifecycle
1 function refresh(fiber)
2 target ← target(𝛾, 𝑛)
3 if target = fiber.target then return
4 fiber.target ← target
5 if fiber.inertia then return
6 if target ≠ ⊥ then
7 fiber.state ← LOADING
8 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
9 else
10 fiber.state ← UNLOADING ▷ out of service before any inverse is scheduled
11 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
12 async function reload(fiber)
13 target0 ← fiber.target
14 fiber.committed ← resolve(fiber.inject) ▷ commit the view
15 recover ← await execute(fiber.apply, () ↦ fiber.target = target0)
16 fiber.dispose ← recover ∘ fiber.dispose
17 if fiber.target = target0 then
18 fiber.state ← ACTIVE
2create_task schedules an async function to run concurrently and returns a handle to it (stored in fiber.inertia). 
We write it explicitly for language independence: with eager scheduling (e.g., TypeScript promises), the call 
is implicit and the returned promise is the handle, whereas with lazy scheduling (e.g., Python coroutines, Rust 
futures) the host must spawn the task for it to progress.
19 notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber))
20 fiber.inertia ← null
21 else
22 fiber.state ← UNLOADING
23 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
24 async function unload(fiber)
25 await all(notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber)).map(f ↦ f.await())) ▷ drain dependents
26 await fiber.dispose()
27 fiber.dispose ← id
28 fiber.committed ← ⊥
29 if fiber.target = ⊥ then
30 fiber.state ← INACTIVE
31 fiber.inertia ← null
32 else
33 fiber.state ← LOADING
34 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
fiber.target is computed by resolving each declared key against the current coeffect store 
and tupling the uid of the fiber that provides it, so it is a digest of target(𝛾, 𝑛) (Definition 46). 
Identifying a binding by its provider rather than by its value is what makes a single comparison 
against the recorded target sufficient: a uid is drawn fresh and never reused, so a provider that 
is replaced cannot be mistaken for the one it replaced, even when the two provide equal values. 
Since notify (Section 5.1.2) recomputes the target on every coeffect change, a fiber reloads 
precisely when one of its declared keys comes to be provided by a different fiber. A provider 
that overwrites its own binding in place is therefore not observed; a component that wants its 
replacement to propagate withdraws the binding and installs it afresh.
The algorithm operates at two complementary levels. At the transition level, reload and 
unload check the target at completion, enabling inertial chaining across transitions. At the 
iteration level within each transition, the effect execution (Algorithm 1) checks the target at each 
iteration boundary, enabling partial rollback within a single transition. These two mechanisms 
correspond to the inter-transition chaining of Section 4.3.3 and the intra-transition staleness 
check that Theorem 64 rests on.
Three lines carry the coeffect ordering of Theorem 63, and where each of them sits is what 
makes the ordering hold. reload commits the resolved view at Line 14 and unload discards it 
only after every inverse has run, so a fiber reads the same bindings for as long as it is loaded, its 
own teardown included. refresh marks the fiber UNLOADING at Line 10 before the transition task 
is created, which is the L-Leave step: the fiber stops providing, and the dependents recompute 
against that before any of its inverses is scheduled. unload then waits at Line 25 for each notified 
dependent to reach INACTIVE, which is the guard on L-Unload; notify admits a dependent only 
when its declared key resolves to the same realm symbol as the provider’s, which is the runtime 
form of the guard’s demand that the dependent see the key from this fiber rather than merely 
declare it. The wait sits ahead of the whole recovery rather than inside one of the inverses being 
waited on, since fiber.dispose initiates a fiber’s effects concurrently and a wait placed within 
one of them would leave the rest unordered. Termination follows Theorem 66: a fiber only ever 
waits on dependents that have already stopped being satisfiable, and a dependent that is itself 
a provider waits the same way for its own, so the provider graph is traversed on demand rather 
than analyzed in advance.
5.1.4.  Context Access
The coeffect operations of Section  5.1.2 form a reflective API: a coeffect is written with 
ctx.set(key, value) and read with ctx.get(key), both keyed by name. Cordis layers a second, 
more native way to extend and consume the context on top of this reflective API: property access. 
A component can access a coeffect as the property ctx[key], as if it were native structure of 
the context, rather than through a method call. In TypeScript, Cordis realizes this with a Proxy 
whose get trap mediates every property access. Algorithm 6 shows how a context resolves such 
an access to a coeffect, atop the primitive get of Section 5.1.2.
Algorithm 6 Proxy-mediated context access
1 function resolve(ctx, key)
2 fiber ← ctx.fiber
3 repeat
4 if key ∈ fiber.committed then return fiber.committed[key]
5 if key ∈ fiber.inject then throw INACTIVE_ACCESS
6 if fiber = root then throw UNDECLARED_ACCESS
7 fiber ← fiber.parent.fiber
Algorithm  6 walks the fiber chain upward from the accessing context: at the first fiber 
whose committed view binds key, the access is authorized and that binding is returned; if the 
walk reaches a fiber that declares key without having committed it, the fiber is not loaded 
and the access fails; and if it reaches the root without any declaration, the access is rejected as 
undeclared. This is where the proxy differs from the bare ctx.get: ctx.get(key) is a lookup 
against the store that returns the bound value or nothing and never fails, whereas the proxy 
resolves against the accessing fiber’s own view and enforces the coeffect specification 𝑑 at the 
point of use. Reading the view rather than the store is also what Theorem 63 rests on, since it 
is what keeps a dependency readable to a component whose teardown was triggered by that 
dependency going away.
This rejection is a runtime check performed at the point of access. Because a component’s 
coeffect specification 𝑑 is declared statically, the same violation is in principle detectable at 
compile time, by resolving each ctx[key] against the declared 𝑑 before execution; Section 6.4 
discusses how a host language’s type-level dependency declarations and compile-time 
metaprogramming can carry out exactly this mediation.