5.2.  Component Loader
The core library equips component developers with imperative primitives for dynamic compo -
sition, such as ctx.effect, ctx.use, and ctx.set. A separate concern arises for application 
orchestrators, who assemble pre-existing components into a running system and adjust the 
composition over its lifetime. The component loader addresses this concern by introducing a declarative configuration layer: the orchestrator specifies the desired composition as a persistent 
data structure, and the loader translates changes to this specification into the corresponding 
imperative fiber operations.
5.2.1.  Declarative Configuration
Section 4 decomposes a running system into fibers, each an instantiation of one component. 
Everything an instantiation needs can be declared, so an orchestrator can describe a whole 
system as a declarative configuration: a persistent record that the loader realizes as fibers and 
keeps in step with them.
Entries. A configuration consists of entries. Each entry specifies a fiber and manages it, and 
the binding runs in both directions: the loader responds to a change in an entry’s fields by 
adjusting the fiber, and a component that revises its own configuration or disables itself has the 
change written back to its entry.
Definition 74. An entry declares a single fiber, recording:
• id — a stable identifier, used as the reconciliation key when its group’s child list changes;
• url — the URL of the component module to instantiate;
• isolate — an isolation annotation applied to the entry’s context;
• intercept — an interception annotation applied to the entry’s context;
• config — the configuration bound into the component to form its effect function apply;
• disabled — whether the entry is administratively turned off.
An entry can serve as a faithful specification because what supports a fiber is exactly what 
an entry records. The support set of Definition 67 reads 𝜏, 𝜋, 𝑑, and 𝑝 and nothing else, and 
an entry gives all four: disabled gives 𝜏, the entry’s parent in the tree gives 𝜋, and url selects 
the component which declares 𝑑 and 𝑝. The fields the support set leaves unread are the fiber’s 
runtime state, which an instantiation does not need either, and Lemma 70 identifies the support 
set with the 𝖠𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗏𝖾 fibers of a quiescent state (Definition 49) as far as each component installs 
every key it declares (Definition 69).
These entries form a configuration tree that is the authoritative record of what the system 
loads. An entry may be a leaf mapping to a single fiber, or its component may in turn load 
further components, making the entry a branch node. Cordis provides components for such 
grouped and nested loading: @cordisjs/group takes a list of child entries as its configuration 
and loads them as a subgroup, and @cordisjs/include loads an external configuration file 
(YAML or JSON) and grafts its entries in as a nested subtree. Both are ordinary components 
resting on the registration primitive of Definition 47 (Algorithm 4), so a nested tree stays within 
the calculus and the results below hold of it.
Reconciliation. When an entry’s record changes, the loader reconciles incrementally rather 
than tearing the fiber down and rebuilding it wholesale. Reconciling this way is sound for 
reasons the metatheory supplies.
• Theorem 73 makes the quiescent state a function of the final configuration alone: what -
ever instantiations and retirements the loader performs on the way, and in whatever 
order, the system quiesces where a load of the final configuration from scratch would 
have left it. Which components end up loaded is read off the declarations only as far as 
each of them installs every key it declares ( Definition 69); a component that declares a 
key and installs it under some configurations alone is one the loader can still reconcile, 
but the set of loaded components then answers to those configurations as well.
• Theorem 66 proves that the system does quiesce, so a reconciliation is complete once its 
instantiations and retirements have been issued.
• Corollary 62 puts a departing fiber’s contribution to the state at nothing, so rebuilding 
one entry withdraws what its fiber installed and leaves the fibers around it as they were.
• Theorem 63 lets the entries be instantiated together, with no load order for the orches -
trator to arrange: a fiber whose declared keys are not yet provided waits at its L-Begin, and 
one whose provider leaves is deactivated ahead of it. A dependency therefore constrains 
when a fiber activates rather than when its module is fetched and evaluated, so the loader 
loads modules concurrently, where bringing up a large configuration spends its time.
On top of the fiber that an entry declares, the loader dispatches on which of the entry’s 
fields changed and applies the least disruptive operation for each.
• id, url — rebuilds the entry, since its identity or its component has changed;
• isolate — reassigns the entry’s realms (Algorithm 7);
• intercept — updated in place, as interception metadata is consulted at read time and 
needs no reload;
• config — handed to the component, which decides how to apply the new payload, 
typically by diffing it against the previous one and reloading only on a material change. 
In particular, an @cordisjs/group entry’s config is its list of child entries, so it applies the 
update as a keyed diff over child ids, creating, removing, or updating each child; since 
updating a surviving child re-enters this same per-field dispatch, group reconciliation 
and entry update recurse together down the tree;
• disabled — unloads the fiber when set and reloads it when cleared.
Managed realms. Isolation in the core derives a child context overriding the realm table 𝜌 
at one key (Section 5.1.2), which suffices while the context tree stands still. An entry may be 
moved between groups at runtime, so the loader manages realms of its own, and the isolate 
field selects between two scoping rules per key. A value of true asks for a local realm, private 
to the entry and tagged by its id, which the entry carries with it wherever it moves; a string 
asks for a global realm shared by every entry naming that string, so moving such an entry 
changes which entries it shares a binding with rather than which realm it belongs to. A realm 
is discarded once no entry names it.
Reassigning an entry’s realms turns on which keys changed realm, whether the entry is 
itself the provider at a changed key, and which dependents to notify. The middle question is 
the hard one, since a realm symbol may be shared by several fibers of which only one is the 
provider. The loader answers it with delimiters: one symbol 𝛿𝑘 per key, under which each context 
stores a tag of its own. A delimiter is written on a context and inherited by its descendants, so 
the entry’s tag and the provider’s agree exactly when the two were derived within one isolate 
scope for 𝑘, which is the case in which the binding at 𝑘 is the entry’s own and has to move 
with it.
Algorithm 7 Isolation realm reassignment
1 function patch_isolation(entry, 𝜌′)
2 𝜌 ← entry.ctx[@@isolate]
3 store ← entry.ctx[@@store]
4 Δ ← {𝑘 | 𝜌(𝑘) ≠ 𝜌′(𝑘)} ▷ keys whose realm changes
5 for 𝑘 in Δ do
6 entry.ctx[𝛿𝑘] ← fresh tag
7 diff[𝑘] ← (𝜌(𝑘), 𝜌′(𝑘), entry.ctx[𝛿𝑘], store[𝜌(𝑘)].fiber.ctx[𝛿𝑘])
8 entry.ctx[@@isolate] ← 𝜌′
9 reload(entry.fiber)
10 for 𝑘 in Δ do
11 (𝑠1, 𝑠2, 𝑑1, 𝑑2) ← diff[𝑘]
12 if 𝑑1 = 𝑑2 and store[𝑠1] and not store[𝑠2] then ▷ the binding is the entry’s own
13 store[𝑠2] ← store[𝑠1]
14 delete store[𝑠1]
15 function affected(fiber, 𝑘)
16 (𝑠1, 𝑠2, 𝑑1, 𝑑2) ← diff[𝑘]
17 return fiber.ctx[@@isolate][𝑘] ∈ {𝑠1, 𝑠2} and (fiber.ctx[𝛿𝑘] = 𝑑1) ≠ (𝑑2 = 𝑑1)
18 notify(entry.ctx, Δ, affected) ▷ in place of the realm test of Algorithm 3
The test turns on one property of delimiters. The tag under 𝛿𝑘 is written on the entry’s 
context and inherited by every context derived from it, and it is drawn afresh at each reassignment, so for a context 𝛾′
𝛾′[𝛿𝑘] = 𝑑1 ⟺ 𝛾′ is derived from the entry's context (65)
Write own(𝛾′) for that condition, of which 𝑑2 = 𝑑1 is the instance at the provider. The 
reassignment moves the contexts satisfying own from 𝑠1 to 𝑠2 and leaves the others where they 
are, and by the loop above it moves the binding to 𝑠2 exactly when the provider satisfies own. 
A dependent sees the binding while its own realm at 𝑘 is the realm the binding sits in. Where 
own agrees on the dependent and the provider, both move or neither does, so the dependent 
sees the binding afterwards exactly when it saw it before. Where own separates them, one side 
moves and the other stays, so the dependent gains or loses the binding. The inequality is that 
separation, and the membership test drops the dependents resolving 𝑘 in neither realm, which 
no part of the move reaches.
5.2.2.  Hot Module Replacement
Hot module replacement (HMR) applies the revertible-effect pattern at the module level: when 
source files change, typically during development, the system replaces the affected modules 
in-place without restarting the process. Because a fiber already bounds all of its component’s 
effects and coeffects, a module that is itself a component can be replaced through fiber opera -
tions alone: disposing the old fiber recovers everything the component installed, and a new 
fiber instantiated from the reloaded module reinstalls it. HMR therefore needs no developerannotated acceptance boundaries, as opposed to Webpack [46] or Vite [47] HMR.
The @cordisjs/hmr component provides the HMR engine, which operates in three phases.
Phase 1: Module classification.  The engine takes two inputs: the stashed set (file URLs 
whose contents have changed since the last reload) and the externals set (modules that cannot 
be hot-replaced and instead trigger a full restart). Writing get_imports(url) for the modules 
that url directly imports, it classifies the changes’ dependency subgraph, marking each module 
accepted or declined:
Algorithm 8 Module classification
1 function classify(stashed, externals)
2 accepted ← stashed
3 declined ← externals
4 pending ← ⌀
5 for url in stashed do
6 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
7 repeat
8 progress ← false
9 for url in pending do
10 if get_imports(url) ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
11 accepted ← accepted ∪ {url}
12 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
13 progress ← true
14 else if get_imports(url) ⊆ declined then
15 declined ← declined ∪ {url}
16 pending ← pending ∖ {url}
17 progress ← true
18 else
19 pending ← pending ∪ (get_imports(url) ∖ (accepted ∪ declined))
20 until not progress
21 declined ← declined ∪ pending
22 return (accepted, declined)
Seeded with the imports of the stashed files, the fixed point accepts a module once one of 
its imports is accepted and declines one once all of its imports are declined; any module left 
undecided, caught in an import cycle, defaults to declined.
Phase 2: Stale-entry detection.  Using accepted and declined, the engine then filters the 
component entries down to the stale ones, whose dependency tree reaches a changed module. It 
walks each entry’s tree with get_dependencies, which collects the transitive imports of a module 
while respecting declined as a boundary:
Algorithm 9 Stale-entry detection
1 function get_dependencies(root, declined)
2 deps ← ⌀
3 function traverse(url)
4 if url ∈ deps or url ∈ declined then return
5 deps ← deps ∪ {url}
6 for child in get_imports(url) do traverse(child)
7 traverse(root)
8 return deps
9 function detect(entries, accepted, declined)
10 stale_entries ← ⌀
11 for entry in entries do
12 tree ← get_dependencies(entry.url, declined)
13 if tree ∩ accepted ≠ ⌀ then
14 accepted ← accepted ∪ tree
15 stale_entries ← stale_entries ∪ {entry}
16 return stale_entries
An entry is stale exactly when its tree intersects accepted; that tree is then folded into 
accepted, so every stale module along it is invalidated in the next phase.
Phase 3: Transactional reload.  Finally, the engine reloads the stale entries. It invalidates 
the accepted modules’ caches 3, backing up each removed module to enable rollback, then reimports each stale entry’s component module by its url and swaps in a fresh fiber:
Algorithm 10 Transactional module reload
1 function reload(ctx, accepted, stale_entries)
2 backup ← invalidate_caches(accepted)
3 try
4 for entry in stale_entries do
5 entry.fiber.dispose()
6 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(import(entry.url), entry.config)
7 catch error
8 restore_caches(backup)
9 for entry in stale_entries do
10 entry.fiber.dispose()
11 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(backup[entry.url], entry.config)
12 throw error
The transactional guarantee ensures that the system never enters a half-reloaded state: if 
any module fails to import (e.g., due to a syntax error), the caches are restored and every 
stale entry is rebuilt from backup[entry.url], the previous component whose cache was just 
restored, undoing the swaps already made.