5.1.3.  Component Lifecycle
A component is instantiated as a fiber by ctx.use. This section gives the fiber (introduced in 
Section 5.1) operational meaning as the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3. Two fields drive 
the algorithm below: fiber.parent, the parent context of fiber.ctx that forms the component 
hierarchy (the recursive structure of Γ∞, Section 3.3.1), and fiber.inertia, a handle to the inflight asynchronous transition (or null if idle).
Algorithm  4 shows component instantiation. A component pairs a coeffect specification 
component.inject ( 𝑑) with an effect function component.apply; instantiation binds the 
component’s config into fiber.apply (Line 9), the config-applied effect function ( 𝑒) that the 
lifecycle then runs. The callback function (Line 2) is the effect tracked in the parent fiber: when 
executed, it initiates the child’s lifecycle by calling refresh ( Algorithm  5); when recovered, 
it forces the child’s target to ⊥ and triggers unload. This is the registration primitive of 
Definition 47, with callback as its O-Insert and the closure callback returns as its O-Retire: an 
instantiation is an ordinary tracked effect of the parent, so unloading a parent cascades to its 
children.
Algorithm 4 Component instantiation
1 function use(ctx, component, config)
2 function callback()
3 refresh(fiber)
4 return function()
5 fiber.target ← ⊥
6 unload(fiber)
7 fiber ← Fiber(parent: ctx, inject: component.inject)
8 fiber.ctx ← ctx[fiber ↦ fiber]
9 fiber.apply ← () ↦ component.apply(fiber.ctx, config)
10 ctx.effect(callback)
11 return fiber
Algorithm 5 realizes the inertial state machine of Section 4.3.3, in which reload and unload 
are inertial: once entered, a transition runs to completion before the system responds to a targetstate change. It uses two auxiliary lookups over the coeffect store: resolve(inject) returns the 
bindings the declared keys currently resolve to, and provided(fiber) returns the keys whose 
binding this fiber installed. The refresh function recomputes fiber.target from the coeffect 
store and, if the fiber is not already in a transition, initiates either a reload or unload task2. The 
reload function records the current target and executes the component’s effect function apply. 
Upon completion, it checks whether the target still matches: if so, the fiber enters ACTIVE; if not 
(regardless of whether the new target is ⊥ or a different set of providers), it chains into unload. 
Symmetrically, unload recovers all tracked effects in LIFO order and then either enters INACTIVE 
or chains into reload. This mutual recursion implements the inertial property: once a transition 
begins, it completes before any new transition can start.
Algorithm 5 Component lifecycle
1 function refresh(fiber)
2 target ← target(𝛾, 𝑛)
3 if target = fiber.target then return
4 fiber.target ← target
5 if fiber.inertia then return
6 if target ≠ ⊥ then
7 fiber.state ← LOADING
8 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
9 else
10 fiber.state ← UNLOADING ▷ out of service before any inverse is scheduled
11 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
12 async function reload(fiber)
13 target0 ← fiber.target
14 fiber.committed ← resolve(fiber.inject) ▷ commit the view
15 recover ← await execute(fiber.apply, () ↦ fiber.target = target0)
16 fiber.dispose ← recover ∘ fiber.dispose
17 if fiber.target = target0 then
18 fiber.state ← ACTIVE
2create_task schedules an async function to run concurrently and returns a handle to it (stored in fiber.inertia). 
We write it explicitly for language independence: with eager scheduling (e.g., TypeScript promises), the call 
is implicit and the returned promise is the handle, whereas with lazy scheduling (e.g., Python coroutines, Rust 
futures) the host must spawn the task for it to progress.
19 notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber))
20 fiber.inertia ← null
21 else
22 fiber.state ← UNLOADING
23 fiber.inertia ← create_task(unload(fiber))
24 async function unload(fiber)
25 await all(notify(fiber.ctx, provided(fiber)).map(f ↦ f.await())) ▷ drain dependents
26 await fiber.dispose()
27 fiber.dispose ← id
28 fiber.committed ← ⊥
29 if fiber.target = ⊥ then
30 fiber.state ← INACTIVE
31 fiber.inertia ← null
32 else
33 fiber.state ← LOADING
34 fiber.inertia ← create_task(reload(fiber))
fiber.target is computed by resolving each declared key against the current coeffect store 
and tupling the uid of the fiber that provides it, so it is a digest of target(𝛾, 𝑛) (Definition 46). 
Identifying a binding by its provider rather than by its value is what makes a single comparison 
against the recorded target sufficient: a uid is drawn fresh and never reused, so a provider that 
is replaced cannot be mistaken for the one it replaced, even when the two provide equal values. 
Since notify (Section 5.1.2) recomputes the target on every coeffect change, a fiber reloads 
precisely when one of its declared keys comes to be provided by a different fiber. A provider 
that overwrites its own binding in place is therefore not observed; a component that wants its 
replacement to propagate withdraws the binding and installs it afresh.
The algorithm operates at two complementary levels. At the transition level, reload and 
unload check the target at completion, enabling inertial chaining across transitions. At the 
iteration level within each transition, the effect execution (Algorithm 1) checks the target at each 
iteration boundary, enabling partial rollback within a single transition. These two mechanisms 
correspond to the inter-transition chaining of Section 4.3.3 and the intra-transition staleness 
check that Theorem 64 rests on.
Three lines carry the coeffect ordering of Theorem 63, and where each of them sits is what 
makes the ordering hold. reload commits the resolved view at Line 14 and unload discards it 
only after every inverse has run, so a fiber reads the same bindings for as long as it is loaded, its 
own teardown included. refresh marks the fiber UNLOADING at Line 10 before the transition task 
is created, which is the L-Leave step: the fiber stops providing, and the dependents recompute 
against that before any of its inverses is scheduled. unload then waits at Line 25 for each notified 
dependent to reach INACTIVE, which is the guard on L-Unload; notify admits a dependent only 
when its declared key resolves to the same realm symbol as the provider’s, which is the runtime 
form of the guard’s demand that the dependent see the key from this fiber rather than merely 
declare it. The wait sits ahead of the whole recovery rather than inside one of the inverses being 
waited on, since fiber.dispose initiates a fiber’s effects concurrently and a wait placed within 
one of them would leave the rest unordered. Termination follows Theorem 66: a fiber only ever 
waits on dependents that have already stopped being satisfiable, and a dependent that is itself 
a provider waits the same way for its own, so the provider graph is traversed on demand rather 
than analyzed in advance.