5.1.4.  Context Access
The coeffect operations of Section  5.1.2 form a reflective API: a coeffect is written with 
ctx.set(key, value) and read with ctx.get(key), both keyed by name. Cordis layers a second, 
more native way to extend and consume the context on top of this reflective API: property access. 
A component can access a coeffect as the property ctx[key], as if it were native structure of 
the context, rather than through a method call. In TypeScript, Cordis realizes this with a Proxy 
whose get trap mediates every property access. Algorithm 6 shows how a context resolves such 
an access to a coeffect, atop the primitive get of Section 5.1.2.
Algorithm 6 Proxy-mediated context access
1 function resolve(ctx, key)
2 fiber ← ctx.fiber
3 repeat
4 if key ∈ fiber.committed then return fiber.committed[key]
5 if key ∈ fiber.inject then throw INACTIVE_ACCESS
6 if fiber = root then throw UNDECLARED_ACCESS
7 fiber ← fiber.parent.fiber
Algorithm  6 walks the fiber chain upward from the accessing context: at the first fiber 
whose committed view binds key, the access is authorized and that binding is returned; if the 
walk reaches a fiber that declares key without having committed it, the fiber is not loaded 
and the access fails; and if it reaches the root without any declaration, the access is rejected as 
undeclared. This is where the proxy differs from the bare ctx.get: ctx.get(key) is a lookup 
against the store that returns the bound value or nothing and never fails, whereas the proxy 
resolves against the accessing fiber’s own view and enforces the coeffect specification 𝑑 at the 
point of use. Reading the view rather than the store is also what Theorem 63 rests on, since it 
is what keeps a dependency readable to a component whose teardown was triggered by that 
dependency going away.
This rejection is a runtime check performed at the point of access. Because a component’s 
coeffect specification 𝑑 is declared statically, the same violation is in principle detectable at 
compile time, by resolving each ctx[key] against the declared 𝑑 before execution; Section 6.4 
discusses how a host language’s type-level dependency declarations and compile-time 
metaprogramming can carry out exactly this mediation.