5.1.1.  Effect Tracking
This section realizes revertible effects ( Section 3.1). Every context mutation in Cordis flows 
through a single primitive, ctx.effect: coeffect provision, component instantiation, and every 
other context-mutating operation reduces to a ctx.effect call, so any operation performed 
through the context is automatically tracked and recovered upon component unloading. Operationally, ctx.effect is the realization of effectiter
Γ  (Definition 52): it takes a callback of type 𝔈iter
Γ  
and lifts it to 𝔈iter
𝜕Γ , yielding a dispose closure that, when invoked, recovers the effect. Cordis 
accepts both 𝔈Γ and 𝔈iter
Γ  through this one operation (ad-hoc polymorphism); we take the 
iterator form as representative, since a plain effect function is the degenerate iterator that yields 
a single inverse. What the operation does not check is the witness that 𝔈∗
Γ carries: the callback 
supplies an inverse, and that the inverse recovers the effect it accompanies is an obligation on 
the component author rather than a property the runtime verifies. Theorem 61 is where the 
calculus appeals to it, and Section 6.1 is where the obligation is delimited.
Algorithm 1 shows the construction of ctx.effect. We write 𝑓 ∘ 𝑔 for the disposer that runs 
𝑓 after 𝑔, and id for the no-op; prepending each new inverse therefore yields LIFO recovery.
Algorithm 1 Effect tracking
1 async function execute(callback, guard)
2 iter ← callback()
3 inverse ← id
4 while guard()
5 (value, done) ← await iter.next()
6 if value then inverse ← value ∘ inverse
7 if done then break
8 return inverse
9 function effect(ctx, callback)
10 armed ← true
11 task ← execute(callback, () ↦ armed)
12 async function dispose()
13 if not armed then return
14 armed ← false
15 recover ← await task
16 recover()
17 ctx.dispose ← dispose ∘ ctx.dispose
18 return dispose
The engine execute drives the callback as an effect iterator ( 𝔈iter
Γ , Definition 51) and folds 
the inverse yielded at each step into a single composite. Before each step it consults a callersupplied guard; once the guard trips, iteration stops and only the inverses accumulated so far 
remain. This is the step-boundary interruption of Section 4.3.2: the 𝖬𝖺𝗒𝖻𝖾(𝔈iter) continuation 
is realized by the iterator’s done flag together with guard.
ctx.effect is a thin wrapper over execute that adds two things. First, self-disposal: the 
guard reports the armed flag, and the returned dispose flips armed to false, which simultaneously 
halts any in-flight iteration and makes recovery fire at most once. Firing twice would apply 
an inverse at a state no application of the effect produced, where nothing holds it to reverting 
anything. Second, parent composition: dispose is prepended to the enclosing context’s accu -
mulated inverse ctx.dispose, so a child effect’s inverse is itself an effect on the parent, which 
is the recursive structure of 𝜕2Γ. The component level (Section 5.1.3) reuses the same execute 
with a guard that tests the stability of fiber.target instead of armed.